
The Ones Who Walk Away From Omelas 
From 
The Wind's Twelve Quarters: Short Stories 
by Ursula Le Guin 
With a clamor of bells that set the swallows soaring, the Festival of Summer came to the 
city Omelas, bright-towered by the sea. The rigging of the boats in harbor sparkled with flags. In 
the  streets  between  houses  with  red  roofs  and  painted  walls,  between  old  moss-grown  gardens 
and under avenues of trees, past great parks and public buildings, processions moved. Some were 
decorous: old people in long stiff robes of mauve and grey, grave master workmen, quiet, merry 
women 
carrying their babies and chatting as they walked. In other streets the music beat faster, a 
shimmering of gong and tambourine, and the people went dancing, the procession was a dance. 
Children  dodged  in  and  out,  their  high  calls  rising  like  the  swallows'  crossing  flights,  over  the 
music and the singing. All the processions wound towards the north side of the city, where on the 
great  water-meadow  called  the  Green'  Fields  boys  and  girls,  naked  in  the  bright  air,  with  mud-
stained  feet  and  ankles  and  long,  lithe  arms,  exercised  their  restive  horses  before  the  race.  The 
horses  wore  no  gear  at  all  but  a  halter  without  bit.  Their  manes  were  braided  with streamers  of 
silver,  gold,  and  green.  They  flared  their  nostrils  and  pranced  and  boasted  to  one  another;  they 
were vastly excited, the horse being the only animal who has adopted our ceremonies as his own. 
Far off to the north and west the mountains stood up half encircling Omelas on her bay. The air 
of morning was so clear that the snow still crowning the Eighteen Peaks burned with white-gold 
fire across the miles of sunlit air, under the dark blue of the sky. There was just enough wind to 
make the banners that marked the racecourse snap and flutter now and then. In the silence of the 
broad  green  meadows  one  could  hear  the  music  winding  through  the  city  streets,  farther  and 
nearer and ever approaching, a cheerful faint sweetness of the air that from time to time trembled 
and gathered together and broke out into the great joyous clanging of the bells. 
Joyous! How is one to tell about joy? How describe the citizens of Omelas? 
They  were  not  simple  folk,  you  see,  though  they  were  happy.  But  we  do  not  say  the 
words of cheer much any more. All smiles have become archaic. Given a description such as this 
one  tends  to  make  certain  assumptions.  Given  a  description  such  as  this  one  tends  to  look  next 
for the King, mounted on a splendid stallion and surrounded by his noble knights, or perhaps in a 
golden litter borne by great-muscled slaves. But there was no king. They did not use swords, or 
keep  slaves.  They  were  not  barbarians.  I  do  not  know  the  rules  and  laws  of  their  society,  but  I 
suspect  that  they  were  singularly  few.  As  they  did  without  monarchy  and  slavery,  so  they  also 
got  on  without  the  stock  exchange,  the  advertisement,  the  secret  police,  and  the  bomb.  Yet  I 
repeat that these were not simple folk, not dulcet shepherds, noble savages, bland utopians. They 
were  not  less  complex  than  us.  The  trouble  is  that  we  have  a  bad  habit,  encouraged  by  pedants 
and sophisticates, of considering happiness as something rather stupid. Only pain is intellectual, 
only  evil  interesting.  This  is  the  treason  of  the  artist:  a  refusal  to  admit  the  banality  of  evil  and 
the  terrible  boredom  of  pain.  If  you  can't  lick  'em,  join  'em.  If  it  hurts,  repeat  it.  But  to  praise 
despair  is  to  condemn  delight,  to  embrace  violence  is  to  lose  hold  of  everything  else.  We  have 
almost lost hold; we can no longer describe a happy man, nor make any celebration of joy. How 
can  I  tell  you  about  the  people  of  Omelas?  They  were  not  naive  and  happy  children  –  though 
their children were, in fact, happy. They were mature, intelligent, passionate adults whose lives 
were not wretched. O miracle! but I wish I could describe it better. I wish I could convince you. 
Omelas sounds in my words like a city in a fairy tale, long ago and far away, once upon a time. 
Perhaps it would be best if  you imagined it as  your own fancy bids, assuming it will rise to the 
occasion,  for  certainly  I  cannot  suit  you  all.  For  instance,  how  about  technology?  I  think  that 
there would be no cars or helicopters in and above the streets; this follows from the fact that the 
people  of  Omelas  are  happy  people.  Happiness  is  based  on  a  just  discrimination  of  what  is 
necessary,  what  is  neither  necessary  nor  destructive,  and  what  is  destructive.  In  the  middle 
category,  however  –  that  of  the  unnecessary  but  undestructive,  that  of  comfort,  luxury, 
exuberance,  etc.  --  they  could  perfectly  well  have  central  heating,  subway  trains,.  washing 
machines,  and  all  kinds  of  marvelous  devices  not  yet  invented  here,  floating  light-sources, 
fuelless  power,  a  cure  for  the  common  cold.  Or  they  could  have  none  of  that:  it  doesn't  matter. 
As you like it. I incline to think that people from towns up and down the coast have been coming 
in to Omelas during the last days before the Festival on very fast little trains and double-decked 
trams,  and  that  the  train  station  of  Omelas  is  actually  the  handsomest  building  in  town,  though 
plainer than the magnificent Farmers' Market. But even granted trains,  I fear that Omelas so far 
strikes  some  of  you  as  goody-goody.  Smiles,  bells,  parades,  horses,  bleh.  If  so,  please  add  an 
orgy. If an orgy would help, don't hesitate. Let us not, however, have temples from which issue 
beautiful nude priests and priestesses already half in ecstasy and ready to copulate with any man 
or woman, lover or stranger who desires union with the deep godhead of the blood, although that 
was my first idea. But really it would be better not to have any temples in Omelas – at least, not 
manned  temples.    Religion  yes,  clergy  no.  Surely  the  beautiful  nudes  can  just  wander  about, 
offering  themselves  like  divine  souffles  to  the  hunger  of  the  needy  and  the  rapture  of  the  flesh. 
Let them join the processions. Let tambourines be struck above the copulations, and the glory of 
desire  be  proclaimed  upon  the  gongs,  and  (a  not  unimportant  point)  let  the  offspring  of  these 
delightful rituals be beloved and looked after by all. One thing I know there is none of in Omelas 
is  guilt.  But  what  else  should  there  be?  I  thought  at  first  there  were  no  drugs,  but  that  is 
puritanical. For those who like it, the faint insistent sweetness of 
drooz
 may perfume the ways of 
the city, 
drooz
 which first brings a great lightness and brilliance to the mind and limbs, and then 
after some hours a dreamy languor, and wonderful visions at last of the very arcana and inmost 
secrets  of  the  Universe,  as  well  as  exciting  the  pleasure  of  sex  beyond  all  belief;  and  it  is  not 
habit-forming.  For  more  modest  tastes  I  think  there  ought  to  be  beer.  What  else,  what  else 
belongs in the joyous city? The sense of victory, surely, the celebration of courage. But as we did 
without clergy, let us do without soldiers. The joy built upon successful slaughter is not the right 
kind of joy; it will not do; it is fearful and it is trivial. A boundless and generous contentment, a 
magnanimous triumph felt not against some outer enemy but in communion with the finest and 
fairest  in  the  souls  of  all  men  everywhere  and  the  splendor  of  the  world's  summer;  this  is  what 
swells  the  hearts  of  the  people  of  Omelas,  and  the  victory  they  celebrate  is  that  of  life.  I  really 
don't think many of them need to take 
drooz
. 
Most  of  the  processions  have  reached  the  Green  Fields  by  now.  A  marvelous  smell  of 
cooking  goes  forth  from  the  red  and  blue  tents  of  the  provisioners.  The  faces  of  small  children 
are  amiably  sticky;  in  the  benign  grey  beard  of  a  man  a  couple  of  crumbs  of  rich  pastry  are 
entangled. The youths and girls have mounted their horses and are beginning to group around the 
starting line of the course. An old woman, small, fat, and laughing, is passing out flowers from a 
basket, and tall  young men, wear her flowers in their shining hair. A child of nine or ten sits at 
the edge of the crowd, alone, playing on a wooden flute. People pause to listen, and they smile, 
but  they  do  not  speak  to  him,  for  he  never  ceases  playing  and  never  sees  them,  his  dark  eyes 
wholly rapt in the sweet, thin magic of the tune. 

